Cluster Feature Gate in etcd (#4662)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-etcd/4647-cluster-feature-gate/README.md

## Motivation

In [KEP-4578](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4578) we introduced the feature gate framework into etcd. But the feature gate only works on the local server level. There are various features that require all members working consistently together, so we need to add functionalities to the feature gate to work on the cluster level for these features. 

### Goals

* Establish a mechanism to safely and consistently enable/disable cluster-level features

* Introduce apis/methods to query the enablement state of a cluster level feature.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

It would be easier for developers to add new features that might affect raft or etcd consensus without worrying too much about breaking etcd , because the feature would be Alpha first and disabled by default, and new changes would be mostly gated behind the feature gate on the cluster level.

The developer also would not need to worry about feature compatibility when there is a mixed version cluster.

#### Story 2

Users of etcd cluster would be able to find out which features are enabled in the etcd cluster and decide on how to use them downstream. 

> Currently Kubernetes uses [`FeatureSupportChecker`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/db82fd1604ebf327ab74cde0a7158a8d95d46202/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/etcd3/feature/feature_support_checker.go#L42) to check if a feature is supported by etcd, which basically checks the etcd version and compares the version with a hard-coded map of feature availability for different etcd versions.

Reviewer: `Kubernetes` means `kube-apiserver` right? (just to see if there's any other clients on k8s that reads from etcd)

Author: correct.

During cluster upgrade/downgrade, feature changes across versions should have predictable behavior as allowed by the cluster version. 

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Could it done on the client side instead of inside etcd? 
One could argue that it is easy to know if a feature enabled for the whole cluster by querying each member if the feature is enabled on the client side. But there are several caveates with this approach:
* not all members are available all the time. if some member is not available, it is questionable if the feature can be used, and that could break the HA assumption. 
* some feature might change how a raft message is sent and applied, and the order of messages relative to the index the feature is enabled is critical. Here the consistent index is more important than the time, and it is hard to get that outside etcd. 

#### Should we prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster?

One way to prevent inconsistencies of feature gate between different members is to prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster in the first place. 
We do not think this is the right way because: 

> * we want to keep the ability to turn on/off a feature in a rolling sequence without bringing down the whole cluster. 

Reviewer: I agree.

Minor nit - should we just inline this item? (e.g. `We do not think this is the right way because we want to keep...`)

Author: done

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Backport Risks

> To support feature gate as soon as in 3.6, we are backporting some proto changes into 3.5. There is the potential risk of changing a stable release. But we do not think this is a real risk, because it does not involve any changes other than adding a new proto field in an existing proto, and 3.5 server does not write or use this new field. Protos are inherently backward compatible. This change should also not affect upgrade/downgrade of 3.5.

Reviewer: I think it's also worthwhile to highlight the benefit of backporting. Since proto3 fields are optional (and unknown fields are ignored), we want to provide rationale for backporting this change.

Author: actually because we are introducing a new raft message type, we have to backport. Changed the paragraph.

Overall, when developers introduce new data with a feature, they should be careful to include data cleaning in `schema.UnsafeMigrate`. But we prefer not to have a mechanism to disallow such features to be turned off after they are turned on because new features could be buggy, we need to keep the option to be able to turn it off without bring down the whole cluster.

#### Feature Implementation Change Risks

There are cases when a developer wants to change how an existing feature works. This would make things complicated in a mixed version cluster. One member could have the old implementation while another member uses the latest implementation. How can we make sure the cluster works consistently?

Similar to [how Kubernetes handles feature gating changes for compatibility version](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-architecture/4330-compatibility-versions#feature-gating-changes), if the feature change affects data in anyway, we need to keep the implementation history for at least 2 minor versions (allowed version skew), like

> ```go

Reviewer: Just to clarify, we want to keep 2 implementations (if there's delta), not 2 previous minor versions (3 implementations), correct?

Also I wonder if we can make it easier for developers to make sure they keep the implementation. I am thinking some interface such as (**very roughly**):

```
type FeatureGateRunner struct {
  featuregate.Feature
  Handlers map[Version]func() error
}

func (r FeatureGateRunner) HandleAtVersion(v Version) error {
  return r.Handlers[v]()
}
```

Author: I don't think the additional interface is going to be beneficial. The main benefits of feature gate is it is easy to use, insert the following whereever I want to add new codes. 
```
if featureGate.Enabled(feature) {
  // my fancy new codes
}
```
With the wrapper, it is much cumbersome to use and remove in the future. 

I would expect change of feature direction to happen rarely. It is fine for it to be a little bit harder to keep multiple implementations.

```go
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() <= "3.6" {implementation 1}
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() >= "3.7" {implementation 2}
```
This way the cluster would work consistently because there is a single ClusterVersion across the whole cluster.

## Design Details

### APIs

Cluster feature gate would share the same APIs as the server feature gate. 

A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both. So for all the feature enablement query apis, 
* if the feature is a sever level feature, the result would be if the feature is enabled for that server.
* if the feature is a cluster level feature, the result would be if the feature is enabled for the whole cluster.

### Feature Gate

> A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both.

Reviewer 2: Is there a possibility of converting or migrating a `server level feature` to `cluster level feature` in later releases?

Reviewer 3: Migration would mean we remove it from server level feature gate, which means a breaking change in cli.
So default answer should be no. We might still consider to have a process for migrating by deprecating a server feature and creating a similarly named cluster level feature, but we don't need to discuss it the KEP.

```go
defaultServerFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureA: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: GA},
		},
		featureB: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
		},
}
defaultClusterFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureC: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
		},
		featureD: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: Deprecated},
		}
}
```

The `func (s *EtcdServer) FeatureEnabled(key Feature) bool` interface would return if the feature is enabled for the whole cluster if it is registered as a cluster level feature.

> The feature gates for a server can only be set with the `--feature-gates`flag or in the `config-file` during startup. We do not support dynamically changing the feature gates when the server is running.

Reviewer 2: nit:  a space in between ``feature-gates` flag...

This story applies similar to the upgrade/downgrade scenarios as well.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Could it done on the client side instead of inside etcd? 
One could argue that it is easy to know if a feature enabled for the whole cluster by querying each member if the feature is enabled on the client side. But there are several caveates with this approach:
* not all members are available all the time. if some member is not available, it is questionable if the feature can be used, and that could break the HA assumption. 
* some feature might change how a raft message is sent and applied, and the order of messages relative to the index the feature is enabled is critical. Here the consistent index is more important than the time, and it is hard to get that outside etcd. 

#### Should we prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster?

One way to prevent inconsistencies of feature gate between different members is to prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster in the first place. 

> We do not think this is the right way because we want to keep the ability to turn on/off a feature in a rolling sequence without bringing down the whole cluster. 

Reviewer 4: Would there be a use case where a specific feature requires all the nodes to enable/disable it at the same time in order to function correctly? (thus we have to block inconsistent nodes from joining)

Author: There are cases like that. That's why we need the consensus algorithm to set the final values of feature gates. It should not block inconsistent nodes from joining, the leader will decide what value to use.

Ideally, the developer should introduced a new feature if they want to do major changes. If that is not desirable, similar to [how Kubernetes handles feature gating changes for compatibility version](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-architecture/4330-compatibility-versions#feature-gating-changes), we need to keep the implementation history for at least 2 minor versions (allowed version skew) in the code base if the feature change affects data in anyway, like
```go
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() <= "3.6" {implementation 1}
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() >= "3.7" {implementation 2}
```
This way the cluster would work consistently because there is a single ClusterVersion across the whole cluster.

## Design Details

### APIs

New client APIs will be added to query if a feature is enabled.
A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both. So for all the feature enablement query apis, 

> * if the feature is a sever level feature, the result would be if the feature is enabled for that server.

Reviewer 4: a ~~sever~~ server level feature

For features that fundamentally influence the workings of the entire cluster we need a mechanism that ensures that all members agree on the feature enablement. To address these challenges, we propose introducing a cluster-wide feature enablement mechanism that ensures consistent feature activation across all members of an etcd cluster.

### Goals

* Cluster-Wide Feature Consistency: Establish a server-side mechanism to ensure that specific features are either enabled or disabled consistently across all members of an etcd cluster.
* Safe Feature Dependency: Provide a client-side mechanism that allows external systems and applications to reliably determine if a cluster-wide feature is enabled, enabling them to safely depend on and utilize that feature.

### Non-Goals

* Backporting a feature gate to a patch version is not supported.

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

> #### Story 1
> 
> A developer is adding a new feature of a new write type. Because it requires a consensus write, the request should be rejected if the feature is not enabled or the request can be processed on all cluster members. 
> Today, each change in etcd API, requires development spenning at least 2 minor versions. First a raft proto change needs to be added and wait a release before it can be used. Only a release later it can be actually used to prevent a incompatible proto being used during upgrade/downgrade process. 
> 
> With cluster level feature gate, a server would know if a feature is enabled on all members, and decide whether or not to accept the new write request.

Reviewer 3: Ups, I think the description of this user story is not fully relevant, sorry. What I described described should be solved using cluster version. 
```suggestion
#### Story 1: Developing Features Impacting the Apply Loop

A developer is adding a new feature that modifies the etcd apply loop. This change could impact how data is processed and replicated across the cluster. An example of such a feature is [persisted lease checkpoints](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/pull/13508). Currently, enabling such a feature requires careful coordination and potentially taking the entire cluster down to ensure all members apply the changes consistently. This lack of flexibility restricts development and can lead to operational disruptions.

With cluster-wide feature enablement, we can enable or disable such features in a controlled manner, ensuring consistent behavior across all members during a rolling upgrade, while allowing users to enable/disable the feature as they wish. This empowers developers to iterate more quickly and safely, while also providing operators with greater flexibility to manage feature rollouts and upgrades without disrupting service.
```

#### Story 2

A Kubernetes developer would like use a new great etcd feature, but it is not available on all supported etcd versions. What can they do?
Historically, Kubernetes avoided using any features that were not available on all supported versions of etcd.

> From K8s 1.31, Kubernetes added very complicated and fragile system: [`FeatureSupportChecker`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/db82fd1604ebf327ab74cde0a7158a8d95d46202/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/etcd3/feature/feature_support_checker.go#L42) to detect etcd version, parse it and guess whether this feature based on a set of hardcoded etcd version. It does not really know if the feature is enabled by the feature `--experimental` flag.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth to node that the FeatureSupportChecker checks only member version at the start, and assumes that cluster will never stop supporting the feature.

With a client-side mechanism to reliably determine if a cluster-wide feature is enabled,  would allow Kubernetes to immediately utilize new features.

#### Story 3

> 

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to give some context why users would like to disable a feature. Let's say that after some qualification a feature was graduated from experimental and enabled by default in new release. However, it quickly turned out that the feature is bugged. Users would like to disable it ASAP to protect their production.

> In a HA cluster, users would like to turn off an enabled feature. They need to restart each server node one by one with feature changed from enabled to disabled. Today, after the restarting process begins and before all nodes are restarted, the behavior of the feature is really undefined: it is enabled on some nodes and disabled on the other nodes.

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to give some context why users would like to disable a feature. Let's say that after some qualification a feature was graduated from experimental and enabled by default in new release. However, it quickly turned out that the feature is bugged. Users would like to disable it ASAP to protect their production.

> In a HA cluster, users would like to turn off an enabled feature. They need to restart each server node one by one with feature changed from enabled to disabled. Today, after the restarting process begins and before all nodes are restarted, the behavior of the feature is really undefined: it is enabled on some nodes and disabled on the other nodes.

Reviewer 3: Would be good to note that it's impossible for etcd contributors to ensure that feature maintains correctness during the undefined state. Automatic testing would not be able to cover all possible edge cases in distributed systems, it's even too much for robustness tests.

Author: added.

Now with the cluster feature gate, we can deterministically tell if the feature is enabled or disabled for the whole cluster at any moment.

This story applies similar to the upgrade/downgrade scenarios as well.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Could it done on the client side instead of inside etcd? 
One could argue that it is easy to know if a feature enabled for the whole cluster by querying each member if the feature is enabled on the client side. But there are several caveates with this approach:
* not all members are available all the time. if some member is not available, it is questionable if the feature can be used, and that could break the HA assumption. 

> * some feature might change how a raft message is sent and applied, and the order of messages relative to the index the feature is enabled is critical. Here the consistent index is more important than the time, and it is hard to get that outside etcd. 

Reviewer 3: I think this points is a little unclear. I think it's about fact that order of operations in distributed system can be hard to predict, as they can be arbitrarily re-ordered by leader, which can also be arbitrarily changed. In short, you cannot check if feature is enabled and then assume it will still be enabled when you send a following request.

> #### Should we prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster?

Reviewer 3: I would state the problem differently, there are two alternative approaches:
* configure cluster feature gates globally (either on cluster initialization or via command line flags) and reject members reconnecting with different feature flags.
* configure cluster feature gates based on member proposed feature gates.

I stand for the second option as it allows us to maintain same way of cluster configuration. User just changes the etcd manifests/config file. The first option would cause user changing manifests to cause unexpected crashloop.

The only downside of the second option is that it requires member restart which might be to slow for some critical bugs, however I would be careful with allowing clients to etcd configuration from etcd endpoints. It's opens a security pandora box.

Author: updated discussion in the alternative section.

One way to prevent inconsistencies of feature gate between different members is to prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster in the first place. 
We do not think this is the right way because we want to keep the ability to turn on/off a feature in a rolling sequence without bringing down the whole cluster. 

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: Can you cover how the feature gates will work with upgrade/downgrade? What happens if cluster is being downgraded to version that doesn't support a feature gate? How do we make changes to how feature gate works? Aka how Cluster Version and feature gates should interact.

#### Backport Risks

> Because we are adding a new type of raft request, if we want to support feature gate as soon as in 3.6, we have to backport the proto changes and add no-op apply logic in 3.5. 

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand the risk, it should be mitigated by not using the new proto if the ClusterVersion is low.

Author: I am thinking about sending the `proposed_feature_gates` in the `ClusterMemberAttrSetRequest`, which is sent to raft right after start, before the cluster version is known. So there is a chance it is sent to a lower version member. 

If we enforce not using the new proto if the ClusterVersion is low, there would be a few places to add the ugly code of `if s.ClusterVersion() < "3.6"`, and `ClusterMemberAttrSetRequest` needs to be updated whenever cluster version changes. 
Backporting the proto seems to be cleaner and less error prone.

Author: removed.

#### Data Compatibility Risks during Feature Value Change

There are some features that would need to touch data in the apply/storage layer. Disabling them might result in orphaned data or unrecognizable data that could be breaking.
How do we handle the data change? 
1. if the etcd server knows this feature, it should be able to handle the data when the feature is on or off. How it handles the data at WAL entry `i` is determined by the cluster feature flag set from raft before WAL entry `i`. 
1. if the etcd server does not know this feature, i.e. its version is not compatible with this feature, it means the data is not compatible with the storage version. The storage version migration should handle cleaning up older or newly introduced data.

Overall, when developers introduce new data with a feature, they should be careful to include data cleaning in `schema.UnsafeMigrate`. But we prefer not to have a mechanism to disallow such features to be turned off after they are turned on because new features could be buggy, we need to keep the option to be able to turn it off without bring down the whole cluster.

> #### Feature Implementation Change Risks

Reviewer 3: Can you cover a broader issue of  how how the feature gates will work with downgrade/upgrade? What happens if cluster is being downgraded to version that doesn't support a feature gate? The solution should be the same, using Cluster Version.

Author: added all the scenarios.

### Register New Feature Gates

A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both.
For data compatibility, we do not support changing a feature gate from one type to another. 
If a developer finds out that their feature needs to be a cluster level feature instead of server level after a release, they should add a new feature and use a new feature name.

```go
DefaultEtcdServerFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureA: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: GA},
		},
		featureB: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
		},
}
DefaultEtcdClusterFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureC: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
		},
		featureD: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: Deprecated},
		}
}
```

### Set the Feature Gates

> Conceptually, a feature is a new functionality etcd provides, and it has to work on individual servers first before working on the cluster. The main difference between server level and cluster level features is whether their usage require consistent value across all members.

Reviewer 3: What about this comment? @siyuanfoundation I think we should really consider "cluster level features" (consensus driven) and "feature gates" (lifecycle driven) to be a separate thing.

> Conceptually, a feature is a new functionality etcd provides, and it has to work on individual servers first before working on the cluster. The main difference between server level and cluster level features is whether their usage require consistent value across all members.

Author: how does it work with the flags? When a user set a feature=true, they are not differentiating a lifecycle driven or consensus driven setting.

> Conceptually, a feature is a new functionality etcd provides, and it has to work on individual servers first before working on the cluster. The main difference between server level and cluster level features is whether their usage require consistent value across all members.

Reviewer 3: I'm proposing to create a separation of concepts. I expect there might be cases where we want to add:
* pure server level feature that will never be default (like tracing).
* pure server level feature that will be optional in v3.6, and might be default with opt out in v3.7 and locked to default in v3.8. For example `txn-mode-write-with-shared-buffer`.
* cluster level flag that will not be controlled by user and be default in v3.6 and locked in v3.7 like I expect the fix for compaction of delete revision to be.
* cluster level flag that will be opt in by user, and later defaulted and locked like pre-vote.

When a user start up a new etcd cluster, it is unnecessary and confusing to require them to know the difference between server level and cluster level features. It is really up to the developers to register them to the proper type in the code.

> So the cluster feature gates for a server can be set in the same way as the server level feature gates: with the `--feature-gates`flag or in the `config-file` during startup. We do not support dynamically changing the feature gates when the server is running.

Reviewer 3: I would prefer to separate configuration of server and cluster features in different command line flag. The reason is user expectation. Users expect consistent behavior of flags, are they enabled immediately or they require to reconfigure the whole cluster. They shouldn't need to check the type of flag. 

What do you think?

Author: makes sense. Modified the section.

After starting up, the values of all features (server+cluster level) will be stored in the `ServerFeatureGate` variable of the server.

### Consensus Algorithm

To guarantee consistent value of if a feature is enabled in the whole cluster, the leader would decide if the feature is enabled for all cluster members, and propagate the information to all members. 

> 1. When an etcd server starts, the values of all cluster level features in its `ServerFeatureGate` would saved in the [`member.Attributes`](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/e37a67e40b3f5ff8ef81f9de6e7f475f17fda32b/server/etcdserver/api/membership/member.go#L38) as the field `Attributes.feature_gates`. (see the [discussion](#push-vs-poll-when-leader-decides-cluster-feature-gate) about why we choose to push the information through raft)

Reviewer 3: As discussed before, we should avoid "feature_gates" as name as it implies that those are enabled features gates. They are not, that's the feature gates that member that member is proposing to enable. Recommended name "proposed_features"

1. The attributes would then be [published through raft](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/e37a67e40b3f5ff8ef81f9de6e7f475f17fda32b/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1745) and stored in the `members` bucket in the backend of all members. Whenever a new member joins or an existing member restarts, its feature gate attributes would be automatically updated in the start up process.

> 1. After a leader is elected, the leader will decide the values for the cluster level features based on the cluster version and server feature values of all members it receives.

Author: updated the section.

> 1. The leader sends the final feature values in `ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest` through raft. 

Reviewer 3: If cluster flags should be changed leader sends a proposal `ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest` through raft.

1. Each member apply the updates to their cluster feature gate, and save the results in the `cluster` bucket in the backend.

#### New Raft Proto Changes

```proto
message Feature {
  string name = 1;
  bool enabled = 2;
}

message Attributes {
  option (versionpb.etcd_version_msg) = "3.5";

  string name = 1;
  repeated string client_urls = 2;
  // the values of all cluster level feature gates set by the configuration of the member server.
  Feature proposed_feature_gates = 3;
}

message ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest {
  option (versionpb.etcd_version_msg) = "3.5";

  // the values of all cluster level feature gates for the whole cluster.

>   Feature feature_gates = 1;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  repeated Feature feature_gates = 1;
```

}
```

#### How to Reach Consensus of Feature Gates for a New Cluster

![setting cluster feature gate for a new cluster](./cluster_feature_gate_new.png "setting cluster feature gate for a new cluster")

> We will leverage the consensus `ClusterVersion` to negotiate the cluster level feature gate values:

Reviewer 3: I think we should consider reconciling cluster version and it's features in one proto to ensure they are consistent

Reviewer 3: @siyuanfoundation what do you think about having cluster version and feature flags to be atomic operation?

Author: There are some problems with reconciling cluster version and it's features in one proto. Different members can have different defaults for a feature gate at a certain version, and they do not know what values to propose until the cluster version is known. So I have separated the algorithm to 2 steps: 
1. cluster version is set along with the feature gate default values at that cluster version in 1 request.
2. members propose their own feature gate values at the the established cluster version, and leader reconcile it.

1. if `ClusterVersion` is not set, the cluster feature gate would be `nil`, and all features would be considered disabled. 
1. when the `ClusterVersion` is set or updated, initialize the cluster feature gate with the `ClusterVersion`. At this point,

>     * if the `member.Attributes` of any members has not been set, use the default values for feature gate at version `ClusterVersion`.

Reviewer 3: Don't agree with that, we should not depend on local defaults of leader. I would reserve the right to change to backport disabling the feature by default into a patch version. I imagine a situation that a feature is graduated to early to beta and made default in new minor version. If the feature is bugged we should be able to change default enablement in patch version. Might be a good user story to add.

Author: The alternative would be the leader wait till it receives all the proposed feature gates from all members before enabling any features. But that could mean a long delay before any feature is enabled, even GA features. I guess there is delay in deciding cluster version as well, but this would further increase the delay.

Reviewer 3: Didn't know we targeted "fast enablement/disablement" as one of the goal. Please clarify what latency on enabling a feature you are targeting and what delay you expect.

Author: "fast enablement/disablement" is not one of the goals. It does seem easier to wait for all members to propose first. Update the algorithm.

>     * if the `member.Attributes` of all members have been set, take the common set of all the mbmer `--feature-gates` flags and set values of the cluster feature gate: discard any features not recognized at the `ClusterVersion`, and set the feature to false if there is any member setting it to false.

Reviewer 3: Don't think we should depend on ClusterVersion here. Just read what member propose.

>     * if the `member.Attributes` of all members have been set, take the common set of all the mbmer `--feature-gates` flags and set values of the cluster feature gate: discard any features not recognized at the `ClusterVersion`, and set the feature to false if there is any member setting it to false.

Reviewer 3: I think we should decision about feature enablement from cluster version. If we implement `Feature Implementation Change Risks`  with option for older cluster version it should be compatible.

Author: Updated the algorithm section. Please do another pass. Thank you!

checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [etcd-io/website], for publication to [etcd.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[etcd.io]: https://etcd.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[etcd-io/website]: https://github.com/etcd-io/website

## Summary

> We are introducing functionalities to determine if a feature is enabled for the whole etcd cluster. Users would be able to query cluster feature enablement in a consistent way on the cluster level. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're introducing a mechanism to enable and verify feature enablement across all members of an etcd cluster. This provides a standardized way for contributors to develop features that impact the etcd apply loop, while giving users confidence that enabled features will function consistently across the entire cluster.
```

## Motivation

> In [KEP-4578](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4578) we introduced the feature gate framework into etcd. But the feature gate only works on the local server level. Different members could hold different values of a feature enablement. A request may go through completely different code paths depending on if a feature is enabled/disabled on a server. This is super critical for data consistency if the request is touching etcd data in anyway. Such features requires all members to agree on the feature enablement together, so we need to add functionalities to the feature gate to work on the cluster level for these cluster level features. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In [KEP-4578](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4578), we introduced the feature gate framework into etcd, allowing users to configure feature gates on each member. However, this approach allows each member to run with different features, leading to potential inconsistencies in cluster behavior and data processing. This prevents users from reliably depending on a feature, as they might not know which server will handle their request, and it also hinders etcd contributors from creating features that impact the core etcd apply loop due to the risk of introducing inconsistencies.

For features that fundamentally influence the workings of the entire cluster we need a mechanism that ensures that all members agree on the feature enablement. To address these challenges, we propose introducing a cluster-wide feature enablement mechanism that ensures consistent feature activation across all members of an etcd cluster.
```

### Goals

> * Establish a mechanism to safely and consistently determine if a cluster-level feature is enabled/disabled on all members.
> 
> * Introduce apis/methods to query the enablement state of a cluster level feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Cluster-Wide Feature Consistency: Establish a server-side mechanism to ensure that specific features are either enabled or disabled consistently across all members of an etcd cluster.
* Safe Feature Dependency: Provide a client-side mechanism that allows external systems and applications to reliably determine if a cluster-wide feature is enabled, enabling them to safely depend on and utilize that feature.
```

### Non-Goals

> * Cannot backport a feature gate to a patch version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Backporting a feature gate to a patch version is not supported.
```

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

A developer is adding a new feature of a new write type. Because it requires a consensus write, the request should be rejected if the feature is not enabled or the request can be processed on all cluster members. 

> Today, any new raft request type would need to be added one minor version before the actual feature can be enabled, and the leader would have to optimistically assume the feature is enabled or disabled consistently across the cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, each change in etcd API, requires development spenning at least 2 minor versions. First a raft proto change needs to be added and wait a release before it can be used. Only a release later it can be actually used to prevent a incompatible proto being used during upgrade/downgrade process. 
```

* some feature might change how a raft message is sent and applied, and the order of messages relative to the index the feature is enabled is critical. Here the consistent index is more important than the time, and it is hard to get that outside etcd. 

#### Should we prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster?

One way to prevent inconsistencies of feature gate between different members is to prevent a new member with an inconsistent feature gate from joining the cluster in the first place. 
We do not think this is the right way because we want to keep the ability to turn on/off a feature in a rolling sequence without bringing down the whole cluster. 

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Backport Risks

Because we are adding a new type of raft request, if we want to support feature gate as soon as in 3.6, we have to backport the proto changes and add no-op apply logic in 3.5. 
There is the potential risk of changing a stable release. But we do not think this is a real risk, because it should be a no-op change in 3.5. 
When upgrading etcd cluster from 3.5 to 3.6, the users would need to upgrade to the latest 3.5 release first.

> If we do not backport to 3.5, we would need to add no-op changes in 3.6, and wait till 3.7 to add the real feature gate capabilities, which could be a long cycle of several years.

Reviewer 3: Don't understand this section. Can you clarify what backport you mean? Of the proposed mechanism or a feature gate.

> #### Data Compatibility Risks during Feature Value Change

Reviewer 3: Data compatibility should be handled by cluster version, not feature gates.

#### Feature Implementation Change Risks

There are cases when a developer wants to change how an existing feature works. This would make things complicated in a mixed version cluster. One member could have the old implementation while another member uses the latest implementation. How can we make sure the cluster works consistently?

Ideally, the developer should introduced a new feature if they want to do major changes. If that is not desirable, similar to [how Kubernetes handles feature gating changes for compatibility version](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-architecture/4330-compatibility-versions#feature-gating-changes), we need to keep the implementation history for at least 2 minor versions (allowed version skew) in the code base if the feature change affects data in anyway, like
```go
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() <= "3.6" {implementation 1}
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() >= "3.7" {implementation 2}
```
This way the cluster would work consistently because there is a single ClusterVersion across the whole cluster.

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 3: Please start from describing how features are enabled on command line. Does cluster feature gates share the same command line as server feature, I don't think they should. We should clarify this at the top.

Reviewer 3: Also we should clarify one important thing, server level feature represent stability of the feature and can still have a separate enablement. For cluster level features we should focus on consistent enablement. Both share the same name "feature gate", but gating is different mechanism.

### APIs

New client APIs will be added to query if a feature is enabled.
A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both. So for all the feature enablement query apis, 

> * if the feature is a sever level feature, the result would be if the feature is enabled for that server.

Reviewer 3: Do we need API for server level features at all? Why client would care about them at all?

Author: removed

* if the feature is a cluster level feature, the result would be if the feature is enabled for the whole cluster.

For grpc, new rpc type would be added to the `Maintenance` service.

```proto
service Maintenance {
  ...
  rpc FeatureGateStatus(FeatureGateStatusRequest) returns (FeatureGateStatusResponse) {
    option (google.api.http) = {
      post: "/v3/maintenance/featuregate"
      body: "*"
    };
  }
  ...
}
message Feature {
  string name = 1;
  bool enabled = 2;
}
message FeatureGateStatusRequest {
  repeated string features = 2;
}
message FeatureGateStatusResponse {
  ResponseHeader header = 1;
  repeated Feature features = 3;
}
```

The clientv3 function would look like:

```go
package clientv3

type Maintenance interface {
  FeatureGateStatus(ctx context.Context, features ...string) (*FeatureGateStatusResponse, error)
}
```

The `etcdctl` commands could look like:
* `etcdctl endpoint featuregate $featureName` returns true if the feature is enabled

> Because the feature gate of a cluster could change anytime, even if the client has queried the etcd cluster for feature availability before sending a request, feature availability can be changed by the time the request is sent. So we are proposing to add a new `required_features` field into all grpc requests. For example,

Reviewer 3: What about using the grpc metadata to control non-API semantics?

### Feature Gate

A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both.

```go
defaultServerFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureA: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: GA},
		},
		featureB: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
		},
}
defaultClusterFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureC: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
		},
		featureD: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: Deprecated},
		}
}
```

The `func (s *EtcdServer) FeatureEnabled(key Feature) bool` interface would return if the feature is enabled for the whole cluster if it is registered as a cluster level feature.

The feature gates for a server can only be set with the `--feature-gates`flag or in the `config-file` during startup. We do not support dynamically changing the feature gates when the server is running.

> ### Cluster Level Feature Enablement

Reviewer 3: Please discuss the process in a top down approach. I don't care about the proto details if I don't know how you plan to use it. Suggested order of topics:
* Properties that feature enablement needs
* How we plan to guarantee those properties
* Detail of the process.
* How proto will look.

To guarantee consistent value of if a feature is enabled in the whole cluster, the leader would decide if the feature is enabled for all cluster members, and propagate the information to all members. 

1. When an etcd server starts, the cluster feature gate would be set to nil, which means all cluster level features are disabled.

1. When there is an update in `ClusterVersion` or the server itself, the server would propose the values of cluster feature gates by publishing a new `Attributes.feature_gates` field [through raft](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/e37a67e40b3f5ff8ef81f9de6e7f475f17fda32b/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1745). (see the [discussion](#push-vs-poll-when-leader-decides-cluster-feature-gate) about why we choose to push the information through raft)

1. When the leader received member attribute update from raft, it will decide the values for the cluster level features based on the proposed feature values of all members.

1. The leader sends the final feature values in `ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest` through raft. 

1. Each member apply the updates to their cluster feature gate, and save the results in the `cluster` bucket in the backend.

> ![cluster feature gate consensus algorithm](./cluster_feature_gate.png "cluster feature gate consensus algorithm")

Reviewer 3: I see you added a new step to graphs that is not mentioned in the algorithm. That on cluster changes we reset ClusterFeatureGate to nil. Does it mean that when we do any cluster changes (resize), we disable all features? Wouldn't that cause unnecessary downtime for critical features and user frustration?

Author: Outdated.

#### New Raft Proto Changes

```proto
message Feature {
  string name = 1;
  bool enabled = 2;
}

message Attributes {

>   option (versionpb.etcd_version_msg) = "3.5";

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we target v3.6?

Author: updated.

}
```

#### New Backend Schema Changes
We will save the values of cluster feature_gates in the `Cluster` bucket in the backend.

#### Start a New Cluster

Fig. a above shows how the consensus of feature gates is reached for a new cluster:
1. When the cluster starts, before `ClusterVersion` is set, the cluster feature gate would be `nil`, and all features would be considered disabled. 
1. Before the leader send an update message of the `ClusterVersion`, the leader will send a `ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest` message with empty `feature_gates` to reset any existing cluster feature gate. This is to make sure the feature gate is always compatible with the `ClusterVersion`.
1. Whenever the `ClusterVersionSet` is applied in a server, the member will propose the cluster feature gate values based on its own flags and the `ClusterVersion`.
1. Whenever the leader receives the `member.Attributes.proposed_feature_gates` from a member, it would try to do `UpdateClusterFeatureGate` by reconciling the `proposed_feature_gates` from all the members: 
   * if the `proposed_feature_gates` from any member is missing, the cluster feature gate will be empty, i.e. all features will be disabled.

>      * [NOTE] the leader would wait for all the members to send in their `proposed_feature_gates` instead of just initialize the feature gate to the default values at the `ClusterVersion`, because different members might have different patch versions, and may not have the same default values. We do not want the feature values to flip-flop when the leader changes.

Reviewer 3: I understand that running adding member with different patch version with different defaults might cause feature to flip, but I don't see how leader defaults could cause flip flops.

     * [NOTE] the leader would wait for all the members to send in their `proposed_feature_gates` instead of setting the feature gates based on the `proposed_feature_gates` it has received so far, because it generally better to move the feature gate from empty to the final step in one step, instead of changing it in N(member) number of steps and beining also dependent on the order of the messages the leader receives.
   * a feature is disabled if the feature is proposed to be `false` by any member
   * a feature is enabled only if the feature is proposed to be `true` by all members
   * a feature is disabled if it is missing from the proposal of any member.
1. The leader will send `ClusterFeatureGateSetRequest` through raft to set the final values of the cluster feature gate to all members. 

> One drawback of this approach is that there is a period before the leader receives the proposals from all members when no feature would be available. The duration of this period is expected to be `O(time to set ClusterVersion)`. We think that is acceptable because if the time to set `ClusterVersion` is exceptionally long, the `ClusterVersion` would stay at the fallback version `3.0`, for which a lot of etcd capabilities would not be available anyway. It is better to wait than risking splitting minds about what the default values should be when relying on falling back to default values of the `ClusterVersion`.

Reviewer 3: We should not consider cluster working until the cluster version is established. We could consider defining a cluster boostrap procedure that clarifies that cluster should not serve client traffic until it's ready.

Reviewer 3: cc @ahrtr

Author: Currently the cluster version is established only after the leader can get the version from all members. considering cluster working until the cluster version is established would break HA assumption, meaning the cluster would not be considered working until all members are bootstrapped, instead of the majority. This would be a big change.

1. After bootstrapping, the new server will use the new `--cluster-feature-gates` flag to update its new `proposed_feature_gates` through `member.Attributes` as part of the server [`Start()`](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/67743348dcd2deb1819fded2336749449ebf95d2/server/etcdserver/server.go#L532) process.
1. The leader will received the updated `member.Attributes.proposed_feature_gates` message from the restarted member, and update the cluster feature gates for the whole cluster.

#### Remove a New Member

Fig. c above shows how the consensus of feature gates is reached when removing a member to an existing cluster:
1. When the leader apply the config change to remove a member, it will rerun the `UpdateClusterFeatureGate` logic, update the cluster feature gate based on the `proposed_feature_gates` of the remaining members, and send the updated cluster feature gate values to the whole cluster.

#### Add a New Member

Fig. d above shows how the consensus of feature gates is reached when adding a new member to an existing cluster:

> 1. When the cluster applies the ConfChange request to add a member, the leader will call `UpdateClusterFeatureGate` which will reset the cluster feature gate because `proposed_feature_gates` of the new member is missing.

Reviewer 3: Could we exclude member until it's bootstrapped to avoid flip-flops?

Author: sg.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Milestone 1

* cluster level feature gate implemented.
  * new raft changes added.
  * cluster feature gate added to the server code, and used by a cluster level experimental feature.
  * feature metrics added.
  * e2e tests added for the feature gate equivalent of the selected experimental feature.
  * robustness tests added for current version.

#### Milestone 2
* cluster level feature gate client API implemented.
  * grpc endpoints added.
  * `clientv3` function added.
  * `etcdctl` command added.

#### Milestone 3

* cluster level feature gate fully tested.
  * backport necessary miminal changes to 3.5.
  * feature gates clean up added to `schema.UnsafeMigrate`.
  * e2e tests for upgrade & downgrade & mixed version scenarios completed.
  * robustness tests with upgrade & downgrade & mixed version scenarios completed. 
  * documentation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

For regular downgrade process, `schema.UnsafeMigrate` should clean up feature gates that are not available in the target version.

The feature gate feature would available in 3.6+. 

> In 3.5, the necessary proto changes and no-op raft changes would be backported, but feature gate would not be available. 

Reviewer 3: Could you just implement it via on a client side? If server returns notImplemented(404) for the method, we can assume it doesn't implement any features.

```go
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() <= "3.6" {implementation 1}
if s.FeatureEnabled(FeatureA) && s.ClusterVersion() >= "3.7" {implementation 2}
```
This way the cluster would work consistently because there is a single ClusterVersion across the whole cluster.

## Design Details

On high level, a cluster feature gate would need:
1. a way to [register new feature gates](#register-new-feature-gates) when a developer adds new features.
1. a way to [set the feature gates](#set-the-feature-gates) when each member starts up.
1. a [consensus algorithm](#consensus-algorithm) to determine if a feature is enabled for the whole cluster, even in mixed version scenarios.
1. an [interface](#interface-change-for-server-code) to query if a feature is enabled for the whole cluster to be used in the server code.
1. [client APIs](#client-apis-changes) to query if a feature is enabled for the whole cluster.
1. a way to [remove a feature gate][#feature-removal] when it is no longer useful or have graduated.

### Register New Feature Gates

> A feature can be registered as server level feature or cluster level feature, but not both.

Reviewer 3: I would recommend to not think cluster feature and server feature as two different creations. Cluster feature is a   feature that enablement is done at cluster level.

For data compatibility, we do not support changing a feature gate from one type to another. 
If a developer finds out that their feature needs to be a cluster level feature instead of server level after a release, they should add a new feature and use a new feature name.

> NOTE: even though we have `PreRelease` information in the map, the purpose of cluster feature gate is not for lifecycle management. It is mainly for cluster level feature enablement. So a cluster feature can be `false` even after `GA`, and may not be removed if we want to keep its togglability. 

Reviewer 3: I would remove mention of lifecycle management, cluster feature enablement should not care about stage of the feature, just making sure it's enabled consistently on the cluster. 

One thing that might be relevant is how the process of removing cluster feature will look like. Can we never remove them and maybe solve the problem in the future?

This is different from server level feature gate, where the feature gate is used for lifecycle tracking purpose, and a feature gate is expected to be removed eventually and permanent boolean flags would be added if needed. 

```go
DefaultEtcdServerFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureA: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: GA},
		},
		featureB: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
		},
}

> DefaultEtcdClusterFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {

Reviewer 3: I would register both cluster and server features gates in the map to track lifecycle and keep the enablement mechanism separate.

		featureC: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
		},
		featureD: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: Deprecated},
		}
}
```

### Set the Feature Gates

> To set the correct user expectation, we will add a new flag `--cluster-feature-gates` (+`config-file` configuration support) similar to the server `--feature-gates` to set the values of cluster feature gates as expected by the local server. The server will use this flag value to set the `proposed_cluster_params` sent to the cluster. The final values of the cluster feature gate are actually decided through raft consensus.

Reviewer 3: I would not distinguish cluster feature flags in command line. It's still a feature, that is gated, the cluster part only changes it's enablement moment.

We do not support dynamically changing the feature gates when the server is running.

### Consensus Algorithm

To guarantee consistent value of if a feature is enabled in the whole cluster, the leader would decide if the feature is enabled for all cluster members, and propagate the information to all members. To make our algorithm also extensible to other cluster level parameters, we will change our discussions of the consensus algorithm from cluster feature gates to a more general concept of cluster parameters.

1. When a cluster starts, similar to `ClusterVersion`, the `ClusterParams` would be set to nil, which means all cluster level features are disabled, and other parameters are unknown.

> 1. When the there is an update of `ClusterVersion`, the `ClusterParams` would be reset to the default values at the new `ClusterVersion`, because the `ClusterParams` values at the previous `ClusterVersion` may no longer be applicable to the new version, thus invalid. The new default `ClusterParams` is set as part of the `ClusterVersionSetRequest`. At the same time, when a server applies updates of the `ClusterVersion`, it will set the `ClusterParams` to the new default `ClusterParams` sent by the leader, all the old `proposed_cluster_params` of all the members stored on the server will be reset to nil to wait for the new values to be refreshed. Each field in `ClusterParams` will have a `versionpb.etcd_version_field` annotation to indicate when it is introduced, and the default should be empty if `ClusterVersion` is smaller than the version when the filed is introduced.

Reviewer 3: We should respect flags provided during initial cluster bootstrap. If user explicitly disabled a feature because it's bugged we should not enable at all even if it is default. Based on that I don't think we should initially set `ClusterParams` to default based on `ClusterVersion`.

1. Whenever there is an update in `ClusterVersion` or the server itself, the server would propose the values of `ClusterParams` by publishing a new `Attributes.proposed_cluster_params` field [through raft](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/e37a67e40b3f5ff8ef81f9de6e7f475f17fda32b/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1745). (see the [discussion](#push-vs-poll-when-leader-decides-cluster-feature-gate) about why we choose to push the information through raft)

> 1. Whenever the leader receives member attribute update from raft, it will `UpdateClusterParamsIfNeeded`: decide the values for the `ClusterParams` based on the proposed values of all members if none of the `proposed_cluster_params` is missing. The leader waits for all members' update instead of all the `proposed_cluster_params` it has received so far because we do not want the `ClusterParams` to change up to N times when a N-node cluster bootstraps.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how much we should be worried about cluster bootstrapping with N different feature flag configuration. On bootstrap we could assume and recommend users configure consistent configuration. I think waiting for quorum of members publishing config should be enough.

1. The leader sends the final `ClusterParams` values in `ClusterParamsSetRequest` through raft if there is any change in `ClusterParams`. 

1. Each member applies the updates to their `ClusterParams`, and saves the results in the `cluster` bucket in the backend.

A few other alternatives we have evaluated:
1. Is it better to initialize the `ClusterParams` with nil or cluster version defaults when we have not received the updates of `proposed_cluster_params` from all members?

> In either case, there would be a state change from the initial state to the final state. If we choose to use the version defaults, even though different member might have different default values of the cluster parameters, compared with if the initial state is nil, the change would still be smaller because defaults rarely change between patch versions, and most users would run with parameters close the default values. 

Reviewer 3: I think we should make sure to respect user provided configuration and not explicitly ignore it during cluster bootstrap. As for bootstrap, currently member doesn't serve traffic until it is able to publish it's information. Reality is that it already requires a quorum of members be available, so we could squeeze in feature flag negotiation if we delayed it to waiting for setting cluster attributes.

There are two ways we can solve this issue: 
1. the leader would need to use the default value of the feature if `PreRelease == Deprecated && LockToDefault == true` at the binary version even when `ClusterVersion == nil|MinClusterVersion`. This assumes a feature would not be removed unless it has been stable at `PreRelease == Deprecated && LockToDefault == true` lifecycle for at least 1 minor version.
    ```go
    func (c *RaftCluster) FeatureEnabled(f featuregate.Feature) {
      if c.Params != nil && enabled, ok := c.Params.FeatureGates[f]; ok {
        return enabled
      }
      if c.version == nil || c.version == MinClusterVersion {
        featureSpec := clusterFeatureGate.GetAll(binaryVersion)[f]
        if featureSpec.PreRelease == Deprecated && featureSpec.LockToDefault == true {
          return featureSpec.Default
        }
      }
      return false
    }
    ```

> 2. make the cluster not ready to serve until the actual `ClusterCluster` is established. This would ensure there is no version jump from `3.0` to `3.6` for example, and the cluster is not serving traffic when `ClusterParams == nil`. But this would break the HA assumption (meaning the cluster should be able to server when the majority of servers are online) during bootstrapping.

Reviewer 3: Would like to revisit this, is there any reason we can't set clusterVersion based on quorum of available clusters instead of all needing to be up? It creates a risk that cluster version we be set higher before we have older members join, however I don't know why we would support hybrid version cluster bootstrap.
